The Enum Data Type (#77)
exercism/cairo: concepts/enums/about.md

# Enums

Enums are cairo data type used to define a set of predefined variants for the purpose of code readability and safety. In Cairo, `enum` variants can be declared to hold different data types (uint, struct, tuples, arrays, dictionaries, core default library, other enums).

The code snippet below shows how enums could be defined:

### Simple example of an enum with no associated value

```Rust
    #[derive(Drop)]
    enum Direction {
        North,
        East,
        South,
        West,
    }
```

> The `Direction` enum declared above is a simple enum with four variants: `North`, `East`, `South`, and `West`. Notice that the variants are declared in PascalCase, being the recommended naming convention. Each variant represents a distinct value of the `Direction` enum type. Each variant in this particular enum example has no associated value and be instantiated using this syntax:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Direction` enum declared above is a simple enum with four variants: `North`, `East`, `South`, and `West`. The naming convention is to use PascalCase for enum variants. Each variant represents a distinct value of the `Direction` enum type. Each variant in this particular enum example has no associated value and can be instantiated using this syntax:
```
It's not apparent that this PascalCase, as all variants are single-word ones

```Rust
    let direction = Direction::North;
```

> ### Simple example of an enum with associated value

Reviewer: Convert this subheader into a simple sentence, similar to how it's done in [The Cairo Book](https://book.cairo-lang.org/ch06-01-enums.html#enum-variants-and-values).

```Rust
    #[derive(Drop)]
    enum Direction {
        North: u128,
        East: u128,
        South: u128,
        West: u128,
    }
```

> It is evident from the second example that each variant in the `Direction` enum has an associated value of `u128`. This kind of enum is instantiated as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is evident from this example that each variant in the `Direction` enum has an associated value of `u128`. This kind of enum can be instantiated as follows:
```
nit

```Rust
    let direction = Direction::North(10);
```

> ### Complex example of an enum with combined custom types

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Complex example of an enum combined with custom types
```

```Rust

>     #[derive(Drop, Serde, Copy, starknet::Store)]

Reviewer: Remove all the unnecessary derived traits from all enums

Author: In this case, starknet::Store is the only unnecessary trait?

    struct Move {
        up: u32,
        down: u32,
        right: u32,
        left: u32,
    }

    #[derive(Drop, Serde, Copy, starknet::Store)]
    enum UserCommand {
        Login,
        UpdateProfile,
        Logout,
    }

    #[derive(Drop, Serde, Copy, starknet::Store)]
    enum Action {
        Quit,
        Direction: Move,
        SendMessage: felt252,
        ChangeAvatarColor: (u8, u8, u8),
        ProfileState: UserCommand
    }
```

> An enum can be declared with a combination of custom data types as its variants. In the example above, the `Action` is the complex enum that as a collection of `Quit` (variant with no associated value), `Direction` (variant with the `Move` struct associated value), `SendMessage` (a single felt252 variant), `ChangeAvatar` (variant with the tuple of three associated value), and `ProfileState` (variant with an enum associated value).

Reviewer: - move this sentence above the example
- move the descriptions in parenthesis to be inline comments next to variants they describe
```rust
enum Action {
    Quit, // variant with no associated value
    ...
```

> You can declare an enum inside and outside of a contract. If declared outside, then it should be imported inside a contract with the `use` keyword.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This track is supposed to focus solely on Cairo. We should avoid mentioning smart contracts unless absolutely necessary. If they wish to learn about Starknet, they should visit any of the [linked resources](https://github.com/exercism/cairo/blob/main/docs/RESOURCES.md).

## Trait Implementations for Enums

> In Cairo, traits could be defined and implemented on custom enums. This allows for you to define methods and attributes associated with the enum. We will implement a `Processing` trait on a `Message` enum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Cairo, traits can be defined and implemented on custom enums. This allows for you to define methods and attributes associated with an enum. We will first define a `Message` enum and implement a `Processing` trait for it:
```

```Rust
    #[derive(Drop)]
    enum Message {
        Quit,
        Echo: felt252,
        Move: (u128, u128),
    }
```

> The `Message` enum is made up of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Students should now know what these individual variants represent.
Remove this list of variant descriptions, and merge enum and trait code examples into one.

~ `Quit` has no associated value.

~ `Echo` is a single felt252 value.

~ `Move` is a tuple of two u128 values.

```Rust
trait Processing {
    fn process(self: Message);
}

impl ProcessingImpl of Processing {
    fn process(self: Message) {
        match self {
            Message::Quit => { println!("quitting") },
            Message::Echo(value) => { println!("echoing {}", value) },
            Message::Move((x, y)) => { println!("moving from {} to {}", x, y) },
        }
    }
}
```

> In many situations, enums can come in handy especially when used with the `match` flow as used above in the traits implementation.

Reviewer: Mention that `match` will be explained in one of the other chapters in the track

> Here is how it could be used to process a Quit message:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is how it could be used to process a `Quit` message:
```

```Rust
    let msg: Message = Message::Quit;
    msg.process();
```

Running this code would print `quitting`.

> ## The `Option` Enum and its Advantages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The `Option` Enum and Its Advantages
```

The `Option` enum is a standard Cairo enum that represents the concept of an optional value. It has two variants: `Some: T` and `None`. `Some` variant has an associated value of type `T`, while `None` represents the absence of an associated value.

```Rust
enum Option<T> {
    Some: T,
    None,
}
```

> The Option enum is helpful because it allows you to explicitly represent the possibility of a value being absent, making your code more expressive and easier to reason about. Using Option can also help prevent bugs caused by using uninitialized or unexpected null values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Option` enum is helpful because it allows you to explicitly represent the possibility of a value being absent, making your code more expressive and easier to reason about. Using `Option` can also help prevent bugs caused by using uninitialized or unexpected `null` values.
```

> 

Reviewer: Provide a simple example of using the `Option` enum

> Other native enums such as `Result` enum, allows for thorough error handling. The Result enum is will explained in details in the `Error Handling` chapter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are other native enums, one of which is the `Result` enum, which allows for graceful error handling. The `Result` enum will be explained in detail in the `Error Handling` chapter.
```

# Enums

> Enums are cairo data type used to define a set of predefined variants for the purpose of code readability and safety. In Cairo, `enum` variants can be declared to hold different data types (integers, structs, tuples, other enums, etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enums are Cairo data type used to define a set of predefined variants for the purpose of code readability and safety. In Cairo, `enum` variants can be declared to hold different data types (integers, structs, tuples, other enums, etc.).
```

The code snippet below shows how enums could be defined:

```Rust

>     #[derive(Drop)]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#[derive(Drop)]
```
nit: remove indent in _all_ code examples, it's not necessary

    }
```

The `Direction` enum declared above is a simple enum with four variants: `North`, `East`, `South`, and `West`. The naming convention is to use PascalCase for enum variants. Each variant represents a distinct value of the `Direction` enum type. Each variant in this particular enum example has no associated value and can be instantiated using this syntax:

```Rust
    let direction = Direction::North;
```

> ### Enum Variants and Values

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is the same `Direction` enum, but with variants that have associated values, that store the exact degree of the direction:
```

    }
```

> It is evident from this example that each variant in the `Direction` enum has an associated value of `u128`. This kind of enum is instantiated as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is evident from this example that each variant in the `Direction` enum has an associated value of `u128`. This kind of enum can be instantiated as follows:
```
nit: wording

```Rust
    let direction = Direction::North(10);
```

## Complex example of an enum combined with custom types

> An enum can be declared with a combination of custom data types as its variants. In the example below, `Action` is the complex enum that as a collection of `Quit`, `Direction`, `SendMessage`, `ChangeAvatar`, and `ProfileState`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An enum can be declared with a combination of different data types as its variants. In the example below, `Action` is a complex enum that as a collection of `Quit`, `Direction`, `SendMessage`, `ChangeAvatar`, and `ProfileState`.
```
nit: wording

```Rust
    #[derive(Drop)]
    struct Move {
        up: u32,
        down: u32,
        right: u32,
        left: u32,
    }

    #[derive(Drop)]
    enum UserCommand {
        Login,
        UpdateProfile,
        Logout,
    }

    #[derive(Drop)]
    enum Action {
        Quit, //  variant with no associated value
        Direction: Move, // variant with the `Move` struct associated value
        SendMessage: felt252, // a single felt252 variant

>         ChangeAvatarColor: (u8, u8, u8), // variant with the tuple of three associated value

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        ChangeAvatarColor: (u8, u8, u8), // variant with the tuple of three associated values
```

        ProfileState: UserCommand // variant with an enum associated value
    }
```

> You can declare an enum inside and outside of a Cairo file. If declared outside, then it should be imported inside the base file with the `use` keyword.

Reviewer: An enum must be declared in a Cairo (_*.cairo_) file, what did you mean to say here exactly?

Author: I was going to explain how enums can be used, whether within a cairo file, or if in a very large codebase, it could be declared outside, as an util, then imported in the base file(.cairo).

Let me know if this information is not very much necessary.

Reviewer: I would rather omit this completely, students will learn how to group code in modules and how to import them in the [modules concept](https://github.com/exercism/cairo/issues/38).

        Echo: felt252,
        Move: (u128, u128),
    }

    trait Processing {
        fn process(self: Message);
    }

    impl ProcessingImpl of Processing {
        fn process(self: Message) {
            match self {
                Message::Quit => { println!("quitting") },
                Message::Echo(value) => { println!("echoing {}", value) },
                Message::Move((x, y)) => { println!("moving from {} to {}", x, y) },
            }
        }
    }
```

> In many situations, enums can come in handy especially when used with the `match` flow as used above in the traits implementation. There is a chapter that explains in detail the `match` flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In many situations, enums can come in handy especially when used with the `match` flow as used above in the traits implementation. Read more about the `match` flow in [The Cairo Book](https://book.cairo-lang.org/ch06-02-the-match-control-flow-construct.html).
```
nit: I thought about this more and I think since we can't link to other chapters in the Exercism track, and students might not be able to start the desired chapter (e.g. did not go through the prerequisite concepts) or the concept might not even be written when the syllabus is launched, it might be better to just point students to The Cairo Book in case they want to read more _now_.

}
```

The `Option` enum is helpful because it allows you to explicitly represent the possibility of a value being absent, making your code more expressive and easier to reason about. Using `Option` can also help prevent bugs caused by using uninitialized or unexpected `null` values.

> The function below shows how the `Option` enum is used to return the first elements of an array with a given value, or return `None` if the element is absent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The function below shows how the `Option` enum is used to return the index of the first element of an array with a given value, or return `None` if the element is absent.
```

```Rust

> fn find_value_iterative(mut arr: Span<felt252>, value: felt252) -> Option<usize> {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fn find_value(mut arr: Span<felt252>, value: felt252) -> Option<usize> {
```

    let mut result = Option::None;
    let mut index = 0;

    while let Option::Some(array_value) = arr
        .pop_front() {
            if (*array_value == value) {
                result = Option::Some(index);
                break;
            };

            index += 1;
        };

    result
}
```

> There are other native enums, one of which is the `Result` enum, which allows for graceful error handling. The `Result` enum will be explained in detail in the `Error Handling` chapter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are other native enums, one of which is the `Result` enum, which allows for graceful error handling. Read more about the `Result` enum in [The Cairo Book](https://book.cairo-lang.org/ch09-02-recoverable-errors.html#the-result-enum).
```
I think it's actually better to just link to TCB, since we cannot link to said Exercism chapters. Also, we might launch an incomplete syllabus that doesn't have the "Error Handling" concept written, so this sentence would be misguiding to students.
